 My name is unimportant in this tale. It is not even my tale to tell for it belongs to another race, an avian race, the like of which I have never seen on this planet. The words will be my words, but the story will be their story. We were on a fool’s errand -- or so we believed. Our people had recently come to a great revelation, for we were convinced that Auriga herself smiled upon us and promised us a great future. Why else would these great rays of Dust have been unveiled for us, shining up from the ruins like rays of the sun itself? We  hurriedly put together an expedition and followed those rays through all the strangeness of this strange world. The first ruin was great and ancient, but empty; on the way I picked up the language of the great oxmen called the Goran. The second ruin? Also great and ancient, but full of angry creatures of crystal that threw themselves upon us, shattering the shields of even our greatest warriors. Struggling and demoralized, we followed the threats and exhortations of our leaders and once again took to the road, during which I choked down lichen and fungus deep in a mineshaft as I completed a bonding ritual with a leader of the Delvers. Such are the vagaries of life when you’re a diplomat and scholar of languages. But that road led us to the third ruin. 

For here, at the bottom of a great crevasse that had opened like a wound in Mother Auriga, shedding loose soil that fell like blood, we found the vessel. It had sat there long enough that trees and bushes had grown upon it, though the trees and bushes slid off when we pulled them as their roots could not penetrate its  metallic carcass. As diplomat and historian I was charged with the analysis of the vessel; it was there that I discovered the great metal plaque on the floor. It was there that I discovered ancient pages, recorded on some ageless paper, stored within a tiny vault that opened at my touch. And the air that escaped from that vault! What was that scent? The breath of another world, turning under another sun? Of the strange birdmen whose images we found recorded within? Was it the odor of their last meal, or perhaps the stink of their fear as the ship plunged to the surface? That smell… Metal and paper and animal, yet altered with fragrances that I had never smelled; perfumes that would never again be known on Auriga. And I held the pages, that wealth of pages, and knew that my gods had chosen me, raised me, trained me,  and brought me here for this task. I regarded the texts, I regarded the ship, and I came to my first conclusion. The strange protrusions on the ship are some sort of scientific instruments, used to collect and analyze  information. It is a research vessel, and the log is the log of a great scientist. The vessel is called the GRAY OWL.

On this vessel dedicated to research – as I understood – lay a great sheaf of documents written in several hands. Though the many pages at the beginning were obviously written by a calm, composed author, as I paged through I saw that the later ones were hurriedly scribbled. However, given that the ship had crashed,  I was not surprised that the final moments were recorded at a somewhat higher level of stress.

I am Durgo Kura of the Stormberth Clan, Captain-pilot of the Gray Owl. Though beginnings are often unclear, as the sum of yesterday’s events trigger today’s action, I know precisely which day was the first day of this adventure. The Gray Owl sat in the cargo docks of our facility on Sykagoja, home of the arenas where the select few fought and died to entertain the Torians. In two sunrises I was to once again take the pilot’s seat and fly it to Uchi, our homeworld. I was traversing one of the corridors of the facility; the concrete path beneath my talons at odds with the forests stretching overhead. The shipmind spoke to me. 

I would have preferred to leave without it. Too many of the “gifts” we received as part of the Contract seemed subtly poisonous. But I love what I have learned, and what I do, and what the Hissho may become. If, as my brother once said, the barter in the Contract does not include our souls. 

I entered the doors and continued straight, to the offices, rather than right, up to my quarters.  Through doors, then larger, carved wood doors, I entered the Director’s office. It overlooked a meadow down to a stream. To my left, behind the forest, loomed the bulk of the infrastructure for the arenas. The long, low wooden building to the right, with wide verandas, was the hospital and research center. It was there that  “better” Hissho were being created. 

The Director was outside in the meadow, free-hunting newpigs, predator and prey both clumsy and  overweight. They stayed out of his reach long enough for it to feel like work, then suddenly slowed and died spectacularly. Genetically altered and tamed for sport, like we were. My arms lifted instinctively. 

My eyes and thoughts left the Director, returning from a staged hunt. The shipmind had never addressed  me like this before. I saw, on the screens in the office, the systems coming back online. 

The banality of the question and its lack of decisiveness made me embarrassed for him. The pheromones in the newpig meat made him so docile that he could not even react properly to my intrusion.

As 24 came up on the screen I caught it, just for a blink of an eye. It was blank, then filled with the clash and kinetics of battle. Randomly chosen, perhaps, but it was the Blood Sister whispering effortlessly among the lizards, leaving streaks of red behind her.

Thoughts tumbled in my head. If all systems had failed, and even the shipmind had been touched, the best place to look for answers was both nearby and forbidden. the Director’s own system. Hoping the Director would be slow, I ducked down to look at his screens. Everything appeared normal. but I had heard the strange voice of the shipmind, and knew that it was not. It occurred to me that fifty arenas, each with many cameras, created a volume of data that would be hard to imitate or replicate quickly. Wary of asking the shipmind to do it, I tapped on the symbols of the vast keyboard. The screens presented a minor apocalypse. Arena gates were wide open, the cages of the beasts were unlocked, and strange creatures from across the known galaxy were sniffing their way out of confinement onto the sandy floors of blood and glory. I saw a pack of kwerna, dog-like hunters, circling a single raptosaur who wisely kept to the wall of #3. A tribe of humanoids armed with spears ventured tentatively onto the sands of #7, oblivious of the swarming bloodbats on the beams high above them. In #12 a single Hissho, likely a Blood Sister and guardian of the nest, screamed a challenge from atop of a pile of dead and wounded savagely-clawed lizards. And so on, up to 50, yet when my eyes returned to 3 and 7 and 12 the cameras showed nothing but the pristine sands of empty arenas. No screams, no carnage. I pulled back warily from the console and its screen full of lies as the director stormed in.

In that moment the Director was unable to act, to decide, to move. He paced, running his claws through the plumage of his crest and neck. 

As we spoke the Director opened one of the paneled cupboards along the wall and donned his dress armor.  I had only the knife in my multitool. He threw me a sheathed saber, long and curved. 

I swung the blade, enjoying its weight and the heat that began running in my veins. My ears picked up noises outside, my eyes tracked dust motes, my nose smelled the oil Uragiri used to wax his armor. Torian manipulation under the terms of the Contract had not softened millennia of Hissho instincts. 

We used the wooden desk like a battering ram to shatter the door open. A dead guard – Torian, with a shock prod – was sprawled in front of the facility entrance doors ahead of us; a pair of jungle cats as long as I am tall stopped in their feeding to turn and attack us. They were angry predators whose blood was up from the hunt, and I had not faced all-out battle in many years. But were Hissho, and our blades Hissho. Deflect, riposte, feint, strike. Counter, press your advantage. Feint, feint, strike. 

No, the body never forgets.

The Blood Sisters and Hunters, I reasoned, had little need of my aid. Supplies would be short, but then so is life. I continued to the end of the hall and turned left. The corridor widened for the next forty paces to end at a sliding glass door, many meters wide and high. Uragiri huffed along behind me. This grand entrance to the facility was only used for broadcasts. Screens of our homeworld and the scent of its plants filled the great lobby; in that moment I wished that the battle rage, takamera, had not augmented my senses. We ran across the open space in silence, but as the doors slid open we heard the cacophony of battle. The wide, deep steps of the Great Stairs are an arena in themselves that descends to a vast interior courtyard. During ceremonies they are decorated with bright banners and thick carpets, but now they were bright with blood and thick with bodies. Dire wolves chased newpigs; a raptosaur stalked a giant marsupial; near the bottom a gorilla-sized warhawk fed on a horned auroch whose hind leg still kicked. The door to the Green Wing was on a wide platform halfway down the left side. I saw that the high green doors had been cracked open, and my pulse quickened. Any Hissho would die rather than let beasts threaten the nest. 

We made introductions rapidly and headed outside. Besides the Blood Sister, Akama Daitan, there were four Brood Mothers, their greater girth distinguishing them from the lean shapes of two additional Blood Sisters who were their guardians. With them were four Hissho Crafter scientists, two Raian humanoids, a pale green multi-armed robot, and a squat, three-eyed scientist. We hurriedly ascended the Great Stairs, passed through the vast doors to the facility, and moved as quickly as we could down the corridors and up the stairs to the higher levels. Twice we had to stop to fight beasts; a roving pack of kwerna that killed one of the humanoids and gravely wounded a Crafter, and a pair of security robots that fought the shipmind and our own pale green robot. We were victorious in a strange, silent battle that happened in the networks without a shot being fired. 

We went up. The door to the roof was usually alarmed and secured; today it hung open and swung idly in the warm breeze. The three Blood Sisters slipped through and moments later whistled the All Clear. I stepped out, and saw them spread in a triangle formation across the flat roof, crouched and alert, watching the skies. As the others filed through the door I took a moment to look at this gaggle of refugees I had picked up. The Brood Mothers went through first, silent and strong. I saw the three Blood Sisters advance once they were out—it was clear who was being protecting. Next two Crafters, supporting the wounded one, and a fourth carrying a short sword and a pistol. They all had the dark feathers in browns and deep greens of the technically minded clans of the Hika Savanna. The wounded one was likely their superior, given the deference with which they treated him. The robot was a sleek thing, shaped like a tall, slender cone or pyramid with a mass of articulations for sensing and manipulating. A pair of cameras on short stalks rose from the top and regarded me. 

A second series of bullets slapped across the hard surface, and the Blood Sister on the left side decided it was too close. Before I or Akama could say anything she leapt for the small hovercraft, dying in a spray of bullets as she jammed her weapon through the defensive grill and into the fans. The hovercop swung up and to the side, bouncing erratically across the roof until it dropped off. The sudden silence that followed was broken by a crash, but I wasn’t listening. I was watching one of the Brood Mothers slowly topple over, blood running from a dozen wounds. With her dying breath she said one word; the same one that Akama was yelling. 

I screamed at the group. I could hear breath coming harshly; erratic footsteps; coughing. We had run through the facility, climbed stairs, and were now racing across a rooftop. Only the Blood Sisters were fit enough to be unaffected; the rest of us moved on adrenaline. 

We made it to the far end of the roof, crossed a walkway, and arrived safely at a maintenance entrance to the hangers; its laser defenses had been deactivated by the shipmind. The great bulk of the structure, built into the side of the hill, stood in front of us, but to the side I could see the Gray Owl. The shipmind had apparently readied it for departure and moved it from its berth. We were all bent over or on our knees; only the Blood Sisters remained bright-eyed and alert. 

Our ship was damaged in the take off, but we managed to get far enough from Sykagoja to engage the string gravitics drive. I saw to the survivors and the seven stowaways before I tended my own wounds, took my own rest. The role of the Blood Sister is always to protect, to secure. Still, I was angry for our losses. Nesa Ye, the Brood Mother, and my Blood Sister, Katte Shogata, should have been with us today. The Captain-Pilot is a regrettable loss, but his lack of focus on priorities led to the inevitable. In his favour, the image of his final action confronting the Torian guards is a noble one. May his spirit be given entrance to the Last Eyrie. But anger at what-may-have-been is useless for a warrior; my concern is where we are, what we must do next. One cannot drive a vehicle looking in the rear cams.


 